= Declarative Authorization

The declarative authorization plugin offers an authorization mechanism inspired 
by _RBAC_.  The most notable distinction to other authorization plugins is the
declarative approach.  That is, authorization rules are not defined
programmatically in between business logic but in an authorization configuration.

With programmatic authorization rules, the developer needs to specify which roles are
allowed to access a specific controller action or a part of a view, which is
not DRY.  With a growing application code base roles' permissions often
change and new roles are introduced. Then, at several places of the source code
the changes have to be implemented, possibly leading to omissions and thus hard
to find errors.  In these cases, a declarative approach as offered by decl_auth
increases the development and maintenance efficiency.


Plugin features
* Authorization at controller action level
* Authorization helpers for Views
* Authorization at model level
  * Authorize CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) activities
  * Query rewriting to automatically only fetch authorized records
* DSL for specifying Authorization rules in an authorization configuration


Requirements
* An authentication mechanism 
  * User object in Controller#current_user
  * (For model security) Setting Authorization.current_user
* User objects need to respond to a method :role_symbols that returns an
  array of role symbols
See below for installation instructions.


There is a decl_auth screencast by Ryan Bates, nicely introducing the main concepts:
http://railscasts.com/episodes/188-declarative-authorization


= Authorization Data Model

 ----- App domain ----|-------- Authorization conf ---------|------- App domain ------

                       includes                   includes
                        .--.                        .---.
                        |  v                        |   v
  .------.  can_play  .------.  has_permission  .------------.  requires  .----------.
  | User |----------->| Role |----------------->| Permission |<-----------| Activity |
  '------' *        * '------' *              * '------------' 1        * '----------'
                                                      |
                                              .-------+------.
                                           1 /        | 1     \ *
                                 .-----------.   .---------.  .-----------.
                                 | Privilege |   | Context |  | Attribute |
                                 '-----------'   '---------'  '-----------'

In the application domain, each *User* may be assigned to *Roles* that should 
define the users' job in the application, such as _Administrator_.  On the 
right-hand side of this diagram, application developers specify which *Permissions* 
are necessary for users to perform activities, such as calling a controller action,
viewing parts of a View or acting on records in the database.  Note that
Permissions consist of an *Privilege* that is to be performed, such as _read_, 
and a *Context* in that the Operation takes place, such as _companies_.

In the authorization configuration, Permissions are assigned to Roles and Role
and Permission hierarchies are defined.  *Attributes* may be employed to allow
authorization according to dynamic information about the context and the
current user, e.g. "only allow access on employees that belong to the
current user's branch."


= Examples

A fully functional example application can be found at
http://github.com/stffn/decl_auth_demo_app

Details on the demonstrated methods can be found in the API docs, either
generated by yourself or at http://www.tzi.org/~sbartsch/declarative_authorization

== Controller

If authentication is in place, there are two ways to enable user-specific
access control on controller actions.  For resource controllers, which more
or less follow the CRUD pattern, +filter_resource_access+ is the simplest
approach.  It sets up instance variables in before filters and calls
filter_access_to with the appropriate parameters to protect the CRUD methods.

    class EmployeesController < ApplicationController
      filter_resource_access
      ...
    end

See Authorization::AuthorizationInController::ClassMethods for options on
nested resources and custom member and collection actions.

If you prefer less magic or your controller has no resemblance with the resource
controllers, directly calling filter_access_to may be the better option.  Examples
are given in the following.  E.g. the privilege index users is required for
action index.  This works as a first default configuration for RESTful
controllers, with these privileges easily handled in the authorization
configuration, which will be described below.

    class EmployeesController < ApplicationController
      filter_access_to :all
      def index
        ...
      end
      ...
    end

When custom actions are added to such a controller, it helps to define more
clearly which privileges are the respective requirements.  That is when the
filter_access_to call may become more verbose:

    class EmployeesController < ApplicationController
      filter_access_to :all
      # this one would be included in :all, but :read seems to be
      # a more suitable privilege than :auto_complete_for_user_name
      filter_access_to :auto_complete_for_employee_name, :require => :read
      def auto_complete_for_employee_name
        ...
      end
      ...
    end

For some actions it might be necessary to check certain attributes of the
object the action is to be acting on.  Then, the object needs to be loaded 
before the action's access control is evaluated.  On the other hand, some actions
might prefer the authorization to ignore specific attribute checks as the object is
unknown at checking time, so attribute checks and thus automatic loading of
objects needs to be enabled explicitly.

    class EmployeesController < ApplicationController
      filter_access_to :update, :attribute_check => true
      def update
        # @employee is already loaded from param[:id] because of :attribute_check
      end
    end

You can provide the needed object through before_filters.  This way, you have
full control over the object that the conditions are checked against.  Just make
sure, your before_filters occur before any of the filter_access_to calls.

    class EmployeesController < ApplicationController
      before_filter :new_employee_from_params, :only => :create
      before_filter :new_employee, :only => [:index, :new]
      filter_access_to :all, :attribute_check => true

      def create
        @employee.save!
      end

      protected
      def new_employee_from_params
        @employee = Employee.new(params[:employee])
      end
    end

If the access is denied, a +permission_denied+ method is called on the
current_controller, if defined, and the issue is logged.
For further customization of the filters and object loading, have a look at 
the complete API documentation of filter_access_to in 
Authorization::AuthorizationInController::ClassMethods.


== Views

In views, a simple permitted_to? helper makes showing blocks according to the
current user's privileges easy:

    <% permitted_to? :create, :employees do %>
    <%= link_to 'New', new_employee_path %>
    <% end %>

Only giving a symbol :employees as context prevents any checks of attributes
as there is no object to check against.  For example, in case of nested resources
a new object may come in handy:

    <% permitted_to? :create, Branch.new(:company => @company) do
            # or @company.branches.new
            # or even @company.branches %>
    <%= link_to 'New', new_company_branch_path(@company) %>
    <% end %>

Lists are straight-forward:

    <% for employee in @employees %>
    <%= link_to 'Edit', edit_employee_path(employee) if permitted_to? :update, employee %>
    <% end %>

See also Authorization::AuthorizationHelper.


== Models

There are two destinct features for model security built into this plugin:
authorizing CRUD operations on objects as well as query rewriting to limit
results according to certain privileges.

See also Authorization::AuthorizationInModel.

=== Model security for CRUD opterations
To activate model security, all it takes is an explicit enabling for each
model that model security should be enforced on, i.e.

    class Employee < ActiveRecord::Base
      using_access_control
      ...
    end

Thus,
    Employee.create(...)
fails, if the current user is not allowed to :create :employees according
to the authorization rules.  For the application to find out about what 
happened if an operation is denied, the filters throw 
Authorization::NotAuthorized exceptions.

As access control on read are costly, with possibly lots of objects being
loaded at a time in one query, checks on read need to be actived explicitly by
adding the :include_read option.

=== Query rewriting through named scopes
When retrieving large sets of records from databases, any authorization needs
to be integrated into the query in order to prevent inefficient filtering
afterwards and to use LIMIT and OFFSET in SQL statements.  To keep authorization
rules out of the source code, this plugin offers query rewriting mechanisms
through named scopes.  Thus,

    Employee.with_permissions_to(:read)

returns all employee records that the current user is authorized to read.  In
addition, just like normal named scopes, query rewriting may be chained with
the usual find method:

    Employee.with_permissions_to(:read).find(:all, :conditions => ...)

If the current user is completely missing the permissions, an 
Authorization::NotAuthorized exception is raised.  Through 
Model.obligation_conditions, application developers may retrieve
the conditions for manual rewrites.


== Authorization Rules

Authorization rules are defined in config/authorization_rules.rb
(Or redefine rules files path via +Authorization::AUTH_RULE_FILES+).  E.g.

    authorization do
      role :admin do
        has_permission_on :employees, :to => [:create, :read, :update, :delete]
      end
    end

There is a default role :+guest+ that is used if a request is not associated
with any user or with a user without any roles.  So, if your application has
public pages, :+guest+ can be used to allow access for users that are not
logged in.  All other roles are application defined and need to be associated
with users by the application.

Privileges, such as :create, may be put into hierarchies to simplify
maintenance.  So the example above has the same meaning as

    authorization do
      role :admin do
        has_permission_on :employees, :to => :manage
      end
    end

    privileges do
      privilege :manage do
        includes :create, :read, :update, :delete
      end
    end

Privilege hierarchies may be context-specific, e.g. applicable to :employees.

    privileges do
      privilege :manage, :employees, :includes => :increase_salary
    end

For more complex use cases, authorizations need to be based on attributes.  E.g.
if a branch admin should manage only employees of his branch (see 
Authorization::Reader in the API docs for a full list of available operators):

    authorization do
      role :branch_admin do
        has_permission_on :employees do
          to :manage
          # user refers to the current_user when evaluating
          if_attribute :branch => is {user.branch}
        end
      end
    end

To reduce redundancy in has_permission_on blocks, a rule may depend on
permissions on associated objects:

    authorization do
      role :branch_admin do
        has_permission_on :branches, :to => :manage do
          if_attribute :managers => contains {user}
        end

        has_permission_on :employees, :to => :manage do
          if_permitted_to :manage, :branch
          # instead of
          #if_attribute :branch => {:managers => contains {user}}
        end
      end
    end

Lastly, not only privileges may be organized in a hierarchy but roles as well.
Here, project manager inherit the permissions of employees.

      role :project_manager do
        includes :employee
      end

See also Authorization::Reader.

== Testing

declarative_authorization provides a few helpers to ease the testing with
authorization in mind.

In your test_helper.rb, to enable the helpers add

    require 'declarative_authorization/maintenance'

    class Test::Unit::TestCase
      include Authorization::TestHelper
      ...
    end

Now, in unit tests, you may deactivate authorization if needed e.g. for test
setup and assume certain identities for tests:

    class EmployeeTest < ActiveSupport::TestCase
      def test_should_read
        without_access_control do
          Employee.create(...)
        end
        assert_nothing_raised do
          with_user(admin) do
            Employee.find(:first)
          end
        end
      end
    end

In functional tests, get, posts, etc. may be tested in the name of certain users:

    get_with admin, :index
    post_with admin, :update, :employee => {...}

See Authorization::TestHelper for more information.


= Installation of declarative_authorization

One of three options to install the plugin:
* Install by Gem:  Add to your environment.rb in the initializer block:
    config.gem "declarative_authorization"
  Note: you need gemcutter support in place, i.e. call
    gem install gemcutter
    gem tumble
  And call from your application's root directory
    rake gems:install
* Alternatively, to install from github, execute in your application's root directory
    cd vendor/plugins && git clone git://github.com/stffn/declarative_authorization.git
* Or, download one of the released versions from Github at
  http://github.com/stffn/declarative_authorization/downloads

Then, 
* provide the requirements as noted below, 
* create a basic config/authorization_rules.rb--you might want to take the 
  provided example authorization_rules.dist.rb in the plugin root as a starting 
  point, 
* add +filter_access_to+, +permitted_to+? and model security as needed.

== Providing the Plugin's Requirements
The requirements are
* Rails >= 2.1 and Ruby >= 1.8.6, including 1.9
* An authentication mechanism 
* A user object returned by Controller#current_user
* An array of role symbols returned by User#role_symbols
* (For model security) Setting Authorization.current_user to the request's user

Of the various ways to provide these requirements, here is one way employing
restful_authentication.

* Install restful_authentication
   cd vendor/plugins && git clone git://github.com/technoweenie/restful-authentication.git restful_authentication
   cd ../.. && ruby script/generate authenticated user sessions
* Move "include AuthenticatedSystem" to ApplicationController
* Add +filter_access_to+ calls as described above.
* If you'd like to use model security, add a before_filter that sets the user 
  globally to your ApplicationController.  This is thread-safe.
   before_filter :set_current_user
   protected
   def set_current_user
     Authorization.current_user = current_user
   end

* Add roles field to the User model through a :+has_many+ association
  (this is just one possible approach; you could just as easily use 
  :+has_many+ :+through+ or a serialized roles array):
  * create a migration for table roles 
     class CreateRoles < ActiveRecord::Migration
       def self.up
         create_table "roles" do |t|
           t.column :title, :string
           t.references :user
         end
       end

       def self.down
         drop_table "roles"
       end
     end

  * create a model Role,
     class Role < ActiveRecord::Base
       belongs_to :user
     end

  * add +has_many+ :+roles+ to the User model and a roles method that returns the roles 
    as an Array of Symbols, e.g.
     class User < ActiveRecord::Base
       has_many :roles
       def role_symbols
         (roles || []).map {|r| r.title.to_sym}
       end
     end

  * add roles to your User objects using e.g.
     user.roles.create(:title => "admin")

Note:  If you choose to generate an Account model for restful_authentication
instead of a User model as described above, you have to customize the
examples and create a ApplicationController#current_user method.


== Debugging Authorization

Currently, the main means of debugging authorization decisions is logging and
exceptions.  Denied access to actions is logged to +warn+ or +info+, including
some hints about what went wrong.

All bang methods throw exceptions which may be used to retrieve more
information about a denied access than a Boolean value.


== Authorization Development Support

If your authorization rules become more complex, you might be glad to use
the authorization rules browser that comes with declarative_authorization.
It has a syntax-highlighted and a graphical view with filtering of the current
authorization rules.

By default, it will only be available in development mode.  To use it, add
the following lines to your authorization_rules.rb for the appropriate role:

  has_permission_on :authorization_rules, :to => :read

Then, point your browser to
  http://localhost/authorization_rules

The browser needs Rails 2.3 (for Engine support).  The graphical view requires 
Graphviz (which e.g. can be installed through the graphviz package under Debian 
and Ubuntu) and has only been tested under Linux.  Note: for Change Support
you'll need to have a User#login method that returns a non-ambiguous user
name for identification.


= Help and Contact

We have an issue tracker[http://github.com/stffn/declarative_authorization/issues]
for bugs and feature requests as well as a 
Google Group[http://groups.google.com/group/declarative_authorization] for
discussions on the usage of the plugin.  You are very welcome to contribute.
Just fork the git repository and create a new issue, send a pull request or
contact me personally.

Maintained by

Steffen Bartsch
TZI, Universität Bremen, Germany
sbartsch at tzi.org


= Contributors

Thanks to John Joseph Bachir, Eike Carls, Kai Chen, Erik Dahlstrand,
Jeroen van Dijk, Sebastian Dyck, Jeremy Friesen, Daniel Kristensen, Brian Langenfeld,
Georg Ledermann, Geoff Longman, Olly Lylo, Mark Mansour, Thomas Maurer,
Mike Vincent


= Licence

Copyright (c) 2008 Steffen Bartsch, TZI, Universität Bremen, Germany
released under the MIT license

